XPL PROJECT ANALYSIS
Reviewed 2026-09-30
Repository: https://github.com/krimvp/xpl (private)
Branch: main
Commit: 56a11d677cc22893c39c1c929f97aca12fc5d774
Checkout: /workspace/xpl

ASSESSMENT

xpl has a coherent architecture, unusually extensive tests for an early private
tool, and a useful product loop: turn an explanation into structured data whose
references can be checked, then explore it through code-linked diagrams. The
four-package split is appropriate. The browser and CLI use the same core model,
so important behavior is shared instead of being independently implemented.

The main work before wider use is correctness and protection of user edits.
I reproduced six defects, including silent loss of saved viewer edits and source
changes that can escape freshness or drift detection. Passing tests currently do
not cover these cases. Fix these before treating xpl as a dependable regeneration
tool across active repositories. Larger feature work can follow.

This was an analysis, not an implementation change. The checkout remains clean.
Generated indexes, build products, downloaded tools, and review artifacts are
local; no changes were committed, pushed, or published.

ARCHITECTURE AND DATA FLOW

1. packages/indexer discovers repository files, parses supported languages with
   tree-sitter WASM, assembles symbols, resolves heuristic references, and can
   replace references file by file with compiler-derived SCIP results.
2. packages/core defines the schema, lookup models, anchors, graph/sequence
   derivation, focus and reverse lookup, patch merging, ownership rules, and
   validation. It is browser-safe and avoids Node runtime imports.
3. packages/cli implements indexing, inspection, explainer creation, applying
   patches, resolving drift, validation, status, static HTML bundles, and a local
   HTTP server. Its injected IO interface makes command behavior testable.
4. packages/viewer renders React diagrams with ELK and source with CodeMirror.
   Its external store drives both the UI and browser test hooks. Offline bundles
   retain edits in memory for export; server mode persists edits through the API.
5. skill/code-explainer supplies the agent workflow and schema/CLI references.

The supported code languages are TypeScript/JavaScript, Python, and Go. YAML,
JSON, and TOML expose configuration keys as symbols; other text is indexed as
plain text. Heuristic references have an explicit trust label and precise SCIP
tools are pinned. The architecture documents limitations candidly.

Measured scope: 133 production TypeScript/TSX source files and 35,068 source
lines across the four packages; 91 unit-test files; 136 browser acceptance tests.
The root requires Node >=22.12. Review execution used Node 24.19.0 on Linux.

REPRODUCED FINDINGS, IN PRIORITY ORDER

1. HIGH: overlapping writers can erase saved user edits and ownership markers

Code: packages/cli/src/commands/apply.ts:90 and :104;
      packages/cli/src/server.ts:186 and :267;
      packages/cli/src/commands/resolve.ts:80 and :102.

The CLI loads the explainer before asynchronous patch reading and workspace
loading, then atomically replaces the entire file from that snapshot. The HTTP
server serializes its own mutations, but that queue does not coordinate with CLI
commands, another server instance, or another process. Atomic rename prevents a
partial file; it does not make read-modify-write transactions conflict-safe.

Reproduction: start `apply demo -` and pause stdin after the explainer has been
loaded. PUT a view title through the server. The server returns 200 and the file
contains title "User edit" plus provenance.userFields=["title"]. Resume the CLI
with a patch changing only the explainer's top-level title. The CLI exits 0,
but the view reverts to "Original" and its userFields marker disappears.

Impact: normal agent/viewer concurrency silently loses both the user's work and
the protection that should prevent future agent writes from overwriting it.

Recommendation: implement one transaction helper used by apply, resolve, and
server mutations. Use a cross-process lock around reading the latest explainer,
merging, validation, and writing, or a versioned conflict protocol with locking
for the compare-and-replace. Read input before taking the lock. Re-reading just
before an unguarded rename still leaves a race. Add a deterministic regression
that overlaps a server user edit and an unrelated CLI patch.

2. HIGH: whitespace normalization hides changes to program meaning

Code: packages/core/src/text.ts:32;
      packages/indexer/src/hash.ts:76;
      packages/core/src/anchors.ts:181.

Every line is trimmed and blank lines are removed before hashing. This is used
for file hashes, symbol hashes, anchors, and working-tree identity. It is an
intentional formatting-tolerance policy, but whitespace can be semantic.

Reproduction: index this valid Python function:

    def f(flag):
        if flag:
            return 1
        return 2

Then indent the final return under the if:

    def f(flag):
        if flag:
            return 1
            return 2

f(False) changes from 2 to None. Both indexed versions nevertheless have the same
file hash and working-tree commit, and the whole-function anchor resolves "ok"
against the rebuilt index. Similar issues apply to YAML nesting and whitespace
inside multiline strings/template literals.

Recommendation: use exact-content hashes for file identity. Define drift hashing
separately, preserving meaningful whitespace; start conservatively with exact
text plus line-ending normalization, or use a language-aware representation.
Version hash semantics so old indexes/anchors cannot silently mix with new ones.
Add Python indentation, YAML nesting, and multiline-string regressions.

3. HIGH: line movement can leave an index falsely marked fresh

Code: packages/indexer/src/commit.ts:32;
      packages/cli/src/repo.ts:75, :262, and :271.

This is related to finding 2 but has a distinct consequence: even semantically
harmless formatting can invalidate the absolute line/column coordinates of a
symbol index. The freshness check compares normalized hashes, and returns early
when the normalized working-tree commit matches.

Reproduction: build a TypeScript index with function run at lines 2-4, then prepend
two blank lines. The actual function is at lines 4-6. stalenessOf returns no
warning and treats the old index as fresh. No explicit stale-check bypass was set.

Impact: inspections and code highlighting can use old coordinates without warning.
Whole-symbol anchors use index hashes/ranges rather than re-reading current text.
This also undermines resolve --write's stale-index safeguard.

Recommendation: separate exact file freshness from tolerant anchor relocation.
Any byte change relevant to coordinates should invalidate the old index, even
if its semantic content is equivalent. Compare exact hashes, not only line counts
(moving a blank line can retain the same count). Let re-indexing and anchor
re-resolution handle relocation. Cover non-git roots, subdirectory roots, and
dirty git trees in regression tests.

4. HIGH IN CONCURRENT USE: Go indexing can overwrite unrelated module edits

Code: packages/indexer/src/scip/run.ts:544, :556, :602, and :616.

SCIP Go execution snapshots go.mod/go.sum and restores them afterward because
the Go tool may modify them. Restoration compares the final file with the initial
snapshot, then unconditionally restores the initial contents whenever they differ.
It cannot distinguish an indexer change from a user's or editor's concurrent edit.

Reproduction with the injected command runner: snapshot a go.mod, write a user
edit while the runner is active, then return a tool failure without writing an
index. The finally block restores the original go.mod, discarding the user edit.
This reproduction exercised real snapshot/restore code with a simulated runner,
not a networked Go tool. The default tool timeout allows a long overlap window.

Recommendation: run tools that can modify repository metadata in an isolated
snapshot/worktree or make module loading read-only where practical. Merely
restoring snapshots on the original tree is unsafe in an interactive workflow.
Also distinguish unreadable files from genuinely absent files in snapshot logic.

5. MEDIUM: timeout escalation can abandon a still-running child process

Code: packages/indexer/src/scip/run.ts:114 and :123.

On timeout, runCommand sends SIGTERM to the process group and schedules SIGKILL
three seconds later. The immediate child's close event cancels that escalation.
The immediate child can exit while a descendant continues running, especially
if the descendant ignores SIGTERM and has independent/ignored stdio.

Reproduction: a parent spawns a child that ignores SIGTERM with stdio ignored.
After timeout the parent exits. After an additional 3.5 seconds, the descendant
is still in Linux state S (sleeping/running, not zombie). The review explicitly
killed this process afterward.

Recommendation: after a timeout, retain the process-group cleanup obligation
until the group has been terminated or the grace-period escalation has run.
Do not cancel it solely because the immediate process closed. Add a child that
ignores SIGTERM to the process-cleanup test.

6. MEDIUM: clicking a graph stub includes excluded references

Code: packages/viewer/src/derive.ts:128 and :140;
      compare packages/core/src/graph.ts:337 and :549;
      packages/cli/src/bundle-data.ts:134.

Graph derivation applies excludeFiles before aggregating references into stubs.
The viewer reconstructs the selected stub's focus by scanning all references
without applying that exclusion filter. A stub representing an outside directory
can therefore display excluded references to other files within that directory.

Reproduction: src/main.ts calls lib/b.ts and lib/b.test.ts. A view includes
src/main.ts and excludes **/*.test.ts. Its lib stub correctly reports one call.
Clicking it nevertheless highlights both calls and displays lib/b.test.ts too.
This can also disagree with a static bundle's file-selection logic.

Recommendation: move reference eligibility/crossing logic into a shared core
helper and reuse it for derivation, viewer focus, and bundle collection. Preserve
the existing rule that explicitly included files override exclusion. Test both
live and static/pruned bundles with a mixed directory stub.

VALIDATION RESULTS

Dependency installation: passed with npm ci and a workspace-local npm cache.
The initial attempt used npm's unwritable default cache; that was an environment
problem, not a defect in the lockfile.

Type checking: passed for all four workspaces.
Production build: passed. Viewer HTML is 2,328,610 bytes (about 742 KB gzipped by
Vite); CLI bundle is about 844 KiB; all eight WASM assets were copied.
Built CLI grammar smoke check: passed for TS, TSX, Python, Go, YAML, JSON, TOML.

Unit suite: 1,902 passed, 19 skipped, one failed out of 1,922 tests.
The 19 skipped tests are the opt-in real SCIP integrations; they were then run
separately and all passed.

The one unit failure is runCommand's assertion that a killed descendant cannot be
observed with kill(pid,0). An independent reproduction showed that the ordinary
descendant was terminated but remained as state Z, parent PID 1, in this container.
That assertion conflates a zombie with a running process. This environment-specific
failure is separate from the real SIGTERM-ignoring-child defect in finding 5.
Earlier EPERM failures were sandbox restrictions; the properly permitted rerun
produced the results above.

Browser acceptance: all 136 Playwright tests passed.
Real SCIP integrations: all 19 passed across TS, Python, Go, including the
build-tagged Go coverage case. This environment initially had a /usr/bin/go that
was not the Go compiler ("Unknown option: run"). I installed a local Go 1.27.1
toolchain, verified its archive checksum against the official release metadata,
and reran with that toolchain on PATH.

Formatting: failed only for .explainer/xpl.explainer.json. Production code did
not trigger a formatting warning. This is a low-priority maintenance issue;
avoid blindly reformatting fixtures because their line numbers are load-bearing.

Self-analysis through xpl:
  - Index: 335 files, 8,040 symbols, 27,992 heuristic references.
  - One parser warning at packages/cli/test/index-trust.test.ts:25, even though
    TypeScript type checking passes; investigate tree-sitter compatibility with
    that valid TypeScript construct if symbol completeness there matters.
  - Strict validation of the committed self-explainer: zero errors and one
    index-binding warning (it records the previous code commit 61bd439).
  - Status: no unexplained items, drifted anchors, missing anchors, broken
    references, or pending explanation requests.
  - Self-explainer: 74 node overlays, 43 stored edges, 30 concepts, 16 views,
    two tours containing 22 steps.
  - Generated self-bundle: 13,648,334 bytes with 101 embedded source files.
    It opened in Chromium with no page errors; its six-node overview rendered
    in about 2.1 seconds on this worker. This is a single observation, not a
    general performance benchmark or an exhaustive review of every view.

SECURITY AND DEPENDENCIES

The default local-server boundary is sensible: it binds to loopback, validates
Host for loopback binds, checks Origin on writes, requires JSON bodies, caps
body size at 8 MiB, only serves indexed paths, and blocks symlinks that leave
the repository. The browser escapes raw markdown HTML, suppresses images,
restricts link protocols, and bundle JSON escapes '<' before script injection.
Relevant existing tests passed. I did not establish an exploitable XSS or default
path-traversal issue in the reviewed paths; this is not a security certification.

Binding the server to a non-loopback interface deliberately exposes source and
editing to reachable clients without authentication. The CLI already warns about
this. Retain the local-tool scope; adding collaboration requires authentication
and a stronger conflict protocol.

Bundles carry raw contents of selected files, not just highlighted snippets.
Pruning is a size optimization, not a confidentiality boundary. In xpl's own
bundle, the index shrank from 9,488,771 to 9,126,826 bytes (only about 3.8%), keeping
7,506/8,040 symbols and 27,026/27,992 references. Broad views and embedded files
retain much of the graph. Before a broader sharing workflow, consider an explicit
file manifest, secret-file exclusions, and a share preview describing what is
embedded. No generated bundle was uploaded or published during this review.

Installation scripts are disabled repo-wide, reducing native-build friction and
dependency lifecycle execution. Exact grammar pins and the package lock support
reproducible builds. Workspace dependencies expose TS sources, which is convenient
for local tools but needs a deliberate packaging strategy before npm publication.
All packages are currently private version 0.0.0.

The online npm vulnerability audit was NOT run. Automatic approval review rejected
it because the audit sends dependency names/versions derived from the lockfile to
registry.npmjs.org without specific approval. Approval was requested and remained
pending at report creation. Consequently, this report makes no claim about the
absence of known dependency vulnerabilities.

MAINTAINABILITY, PERFORMANCE, AND PRODUCT GAPS

Strengths:
  - Shared pure core logic, typed schema, and strict TypeScript configuration.
  - Good ownership semantics inside applyPatch when operating on current data.
  - Errors identify actionable paths and often suggest IDs or symbol candidates.
  - Extensive fixture, regeneration, pruning-equivalence, and UI tests.
  - Real language fixtures and committed examples make the project demonstrable.

Maintenance opportunities:
  - apply.ts is 1,663 lines, validate.ts 1,388, and the TS extractor 2,175.
    Extract responsibilities when fixing behavior, especially field conversion,
    ownership, transaction IO, and shared reference filtering. Avoid a broad
    rewrite solely to reduce line counts.
  - There are no checked-in GitHub Actions workflows. Add CI for npm ci,
    typecheck, unit tests, build, grammar smoke check, and browser tests. Run
    network-dependent SCIP integration checks in a dedicated or scheduled job.
  - noUncheckedIndexedAccess is false. Consider enabling it package by package
    after the correctness fixes; parser and model code contain many indexing
    assumptions, and a wholesale switch would create substantial noise.
  - Schema checks at JSON boundaries are uneven: patches have detailed runtime
    validation, while parseBundle checks only the schema label and readExplainerFile
    initially checks only object shape. Strengthen boundary validation and error
    handling before model construction; the viewer store is created before the
    React error boundary exists.
  - Keep dependency vulnerability auditing explicit until approved, and add a
    permitted automated audit policy to CI rather than claiming checks were run.

Performance and usability:
  - ELK uses the bundled main-thread implementation. Large layouts can freeze
    interaction; move layout into a worker and retain fallback rendering.
  - Core/view/selection memoization and bounded file-discovery concurrency are
    good choices. However, request-time bundle construction can rederive multiple
    views and serialize large indexes; profile and cache by content revision,
    with invalidation tied to the transaction/freshness design.
  - Live reload is absent. The server rereads data, but the open page needs manual
    reload after an agent changes the explainer. Add revision-aware polling or
    server-sent updates only after edit-conflict behavior is defined.
  - GraphView.layout is accepted and validated but ignored by the renderer;
    hidden has no editing UI. Implement pin/hide interaction or remove unsupported
    promises from the user-facing contract.
  - "Explain this" is a disk queue, not a live request. The existing docs make
    this clear; show pending state/acknowledgment in the UI if expanding usage.
  - Saves are debounced, and there is no page-lifecycle guard for pending edits.
    Consider warning before navigation or flushing safely, while retaining the
    current retry and explainer-download recovery behavior.
  - Installation requires a clone, build, and Claude skill symlink. Simplify it
    after correctness and CI, through a distributable CLI plus matching skill
    assets. Cross-platform behavior needs testing beyond the exercised Linux setup.

RECOMMENDED IMPLEMENTATION ORDER

1. Establish exact source freshness and language-correct drift semantics.
2. Protect every explainer mutation with a shared cross-process transaction.
3. Isolate Go tooling from editable repository metadata.
4. Fix timeout escalation and unify filtered stub-reference selection.
5. Add focused regressions for all six reproductions and establish CI.
6. Introduce revision-aware live reload, safe navigation with pending edits, and
   worker-based graph layout.
7. Package the CLI/skill and improve sharing manifests before wider distribution.

REVIEW ARTIFACTS

Report: /workspace/xpl-analysis.txt
General reproduction: /workspace/scratch/xpl-review.mts
General results: /workspace/scratch/xpl-review-results.json
Additional reproductions: /workspace/scratch/xpl-more-repros.mts
Additional results: /workspace/scratch/xpl-more-review-results.json
Zombie diagnostic: /workspace/scratch/xpl-zombie-results.json
Unit log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-tests-authorized.log
Type-check log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-typecheck.log
Build log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-build-authorized.log
Browser log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-e2e.log
Real SCIP log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-go-integration.log
Formatting log: /workspace/scratch/xpl-format.log
Self-index summary: /workspace/scratch/xpl-self-index.json
Self-validation: /workspace/scratch/xpl-self-validate.json
Self-status: /workspace/scratch/xpl-self-status.json
Self-bundle summary: /workspace/scratch/xpl-self-bundle.json
Interactive self-explainer: /workspace/scratch/xpl-reviewed.html
Overview screenshot: /workspace/scratch/xpl-review-overview.png


Remediation completed on 2026-09-30
=================================

The six reproduced defects above are fixed:

1. CLI apply/resolve, viewer saves, new explainers and request appends share
   cross-process file locks around the complete read/merge/write transaction.
   Apply reads stdin before locking, then reads the current explainer and
   checks ownership. A crashed writer's lock requires explicit removal after
   confirming the writer has terminated; it is never stolen on a timer.
2. Source hashes now use sha256-v2, preserving indentation, trailing spaces
   and blank lines while canonicalizing CRLF to LF. Python indentation and
   blank lines inside string values can no longer silently retain a hash.
3. Freshness compares source hashes even when commit labels match. Adding
   blank lines before a symbol changes the file hash and working-tree id.
4. Go tools run in a private source copy, including vendor and workspace
   files. Tool writes are discarded; no restoration can overwrite concurrent
   user edits. Workspace members must be inside the indexed root, or the
   caller must include their workspace in the root or set GOWORK=off.
5. Timeout escalation remains active after the parent closes its pipes and
   exits. A silent descendant ignoring SIGTERM is killed after the grace
   period before runCommand returns. Tests recognize dead Linux zombies.
6. Graph construction, viewer stub focus and static bundle collection use
   the same exclusion filter and explicit-inclusion overrides.

Legacy sha256 indexes need rebuilding, and legacy anchors remain drifted
until their evidence is reread and reapplied. Resolve never silently upgrades
those hashes. The three example explainers were regenerated, and the xpl
self-explainer was reread, updated and re-anchored to the current source.
Focused regression coverage includes cross-process transactions, overlapping
CLI/viewer edits, independent viewer servers, concurrent creation, semantic
whitespace, moved line positions, Go isolation, workspace metadata and timeout
cleanup. Real SCIP checks pass for all three languages and a Go workspace.

The fixes were integrated with main's subsequent package-curation and
navigation changes. Final validation: 1,944 unit checks, 20 real SCIP checks,
and 145 browser checks passed, as did typechecking, formatting, builds,
seven-language WASM smoke checks and strict self-explainer validation.
The private package mirror was inaccessible in this session. An isolated
validation checkout downloaded the same pinned public packages, verifying
all lockfile integrity hashes; the repository's mirror URLs and package
configuration were preserved.
